DIO dons a jacket with a tight black tank top underneath, as well as chaps with an exposed crotch. His face is now in full-view, and on his head is a heart-shaped circlet to match his knee guards. He also wears pointed shoes known as crakows. This is his form during the beginning of the DIO's World story arc. In most depictions of DIO, his outfit is tinted orange or yellow.
DIO has an extremely muscular build, most probably owing to his vampiric nature and extensive training. He has long golden hair, and has been described as attractive by some characters, such as Straizo and Enrico Pucci.
He also wears a necklace covering his neck scar and heart motifs above his feet and on his pant legs, but he quickly stopped sporting them after his first stairway confrontation with Polnareff.

DIO has consistently been shown to be manipulative and violently domineering, regularly displaying a lack of conscience and empathy; a classic case of a psychopath and a sociopath.
 
DIO's most recognizable characteristics are his boundless ambition and megalomania. Abused by his father, being underprivileged and having lived in the most miserable conditions, DIO set himself a goal of becoming the richest man alive. When he couldn't accomplish that, he settled for becoming the most powerful being on Earth. To do so, DIO used anything or anyone that he could in order to further his goals, disregarding any kind of morality that would restrain the range of actions available to him. Whether it be manipulation, seduction, or straight-up violence, DIO constantly sought to become more and more powerful, and to 'attain heaven'. DIO enjoys being in a position of power above all else and has repeatedly stated how great he felt being in a dominating position no matter what it cost, be it selling his humanity for unholy and forbidden power as a member of the undead, or gaining powers that could eventually have him reshape the world in his image and have everyone worship him as a god. On the contrary, DIO never tolerated anyone standing up to him or equaling him in power, and was enraged and deeply disturbed at the thought several times.
DIO can be extremely charming when he wants to be, with many characters remarking him as being scarily charismatic and fascinating. He has used his innate charisma to gather many servants, mainly Stand Users. He is also a talented actor, shown as he tricked Jonathan Joestar into letting him go. His guise is not perfect though, as there are people capable of seeing through his charismatic facade and allure by his own dark ambitions and power, such as Joseph Joestar, have likened him akin to a cult leader or even in comparison to historic tyrants and dictators like Hitler. 
Possibly through his twisted nature in life, DIO's family values primarily saw him pitting his own offspring through the same crucible of hatred and abuse he was put through in childhood. One of his main standards for the women he sought were those with atrocious personalities, selfish interests, and with the worst of hearts to father his children. His logic was that his children would be tempered with such a miserable upbringing as to breed "strong warrior souls" like himself because that's what happened with his father, Dario. This proved somewhat true, as with only one notable exception (Giorno Giovanna), did his kin exemplify the same kind of wicked nature and lust for power he did.
The Stand exemplifies the user's psyche. His Stand, The World, represents his immoral desire for power and boundless ambition for control, but also his embodiment of determination to do whatever it takes to achieve his goals. This is perhaps what makes The World one of the strongest Stands in the entire series.



DIO has been stated by Araki to be one of the strongest characters in the entire series, being able to defeat many Hamon users with relative ease, notably Dire and Zeppeli, and this was before he acquired his Stand. During Part 3, he awakens his Stand, The World, and therefore, its ability to manipulate time, coupled with his vampiric powers (along with Jonathan Joestar's Stand. It took the combined efforts of Kakyoin, Joseph Joestar, Jotaro Kujo and Polnareff, four powerful Stand Users able to boast many other opponent Stand Users in combat, to defeat High Voltage DIO. Even then, Kakyoin and Joseph were killed in battle (albeit Joseph was revived later), and Jotaro and Polnareff sustained severe injuries. 



The information below derives from a source not written by Araki. As such, it may or may not be considered canonW.
After the death of Jonathan Joestar, Erina Pendleton attempted to escape the wreckage of the sinking ship with the baby Lisa Lisa in Dio's Coffin. However, she is horrified when Dio appears outside of the coffin. He takes Lisa Lisa hostage to force Erina to let him drink her blood. She agreed. During the night, she could hear Dio in pain as Jonathan's body attempted to reject Dio. But in response, Dio would crave more of her blood, which she had no choice but to surrender to him. However, this wasn't entirely bad though, as he needed her alive. He would catch fish for her to eat, but she had a tendency to worry first and foremost about Lisa Lisa, feeding her the fish as opposed to eating it herself. In an attempt to goad her into taking better care of herself, he informed her that she was pregnant. 
 
This caused Erina to begin eating more. Dio would also drink in the sea water and use his vampiric abilities to remove the salt from the water and would then inject it into Erina and the baby. It was then that Erina mentioned that the coffin had two layers to it. She told Dio to get out of the water and use the second layer. However, Dio knew of her plot to remove the false bottom and expose him to sunlight during the day and told her instead to get into the second layer while he would get into the upper. He also kept baby Lisa Lisa with him as leverage should she attempt anything stupid. Dio eventually seemed to manifest an odd ability that Erina couldn't see which allowed him to kill a bird on top of the coffin and retrieve it without exposing himself to the sun's light. Erina would question this. As time went on, Dio enacted a plan to gaslight Erina by accusing her of being the reason Jonathan was dead and then treat her kindly to make him seem more like her friend than her enemy. This went on for a long time until Erina even agreed to marry him.
As time passed, Dio's wounds began to heal from how much of Erina's blood he had drank. At one point, Dio would remove the false floor for a time and ask his soon-to-be wife for a kiss. However, Erina began to come back to her senses and remembers who Dio was and refused, stating that there was no muddy water to wash her mouth out when she was done. In anger, he threw her out of the coffin, but as she floated in the water, she would find her true husband, Jonathan's, head. Dio quickly pulls her up and tells her that Jonathan will eat her as he believed that Jonathan had become a zombie. However, when he did not, Dio was left confused. He attempted to smash Jonathan's head, but was stopped by Erina who stabbed herself in the neck. This shocked Dio and then gave hope to Erina as she finally realized that the one with all the power wasn't Dio, but her. Dio needed her alive, and if she killed herself, Dio would lose everything. Dio, without having any choice, tended her wounds and gave her blood to keep her alive which left him in a worse state than when he had first encountered her. With her newfound power over her captor, she began to rewrite the rules of their engagement and put him on the bottom level of the casket while she remained on the upper levels. Many times she considered just killing Dio, and she easily could have with the state he was in. But her compassion outweighed her vengeful feelings and instead, she merely pitied the vampire. When she was rescued by fishermen, as opposed to killing him, she merely had the fishermen weigh down the casket and sank it into the sea. 
For years, he spent time at the bottom of the sea with only his thoughts and Jonathan's Stand to entertain him. With this Stand, he could witness the future. Through use of it, as well as his Beyond, Trinity, he manipulated events, causing his own future son to dream of him where he would manipulate him to accomplish his own goals. This causes Giorno to awaken his Diavolo persona which he would later have return through time with Cube House's ability and awaken him. He would later drink Giorno's blood and then travel time with Cube House, meet Funny Valentine, and eventually kill a version of Kars and consume him. After some time, he returns back in time with what was left of this version of Kars. It is then that Giorno's body having reverted from his Diavolo personality would attempt to attack Dio, only to be defeated. Dio would then rip out a part of his soul which contained his stand and implant it into Giorno, which would transform Giorno into an incarnation of DIO. Dio would then put his transformed son into the coffin and close it before stating that he plans to sleep for two years until DIO is killed by Jotaro Kujo in Egypt where he will then reclaim his soul. 
 
Dio would then find himself reunited with Funny Valentine who would introduce him to Joji Joestar, Narancia Ghirga, Kars, Penelope de la Rosa and Enrico Pucci, the latter of which would mistake Dio for Jesus and would suddenly achieve Heaven. Before Pucci can speed up time, Dio has Antonio Torres eat Pucci to get him out of the bubble surrounding the United Kingdom. Here, Pucci accelerates time to infinity and resets the universe 36 times, allowing them to enter Universe 37 where Dio is eager to fight against the Ultimate Life Form Kars, who is just as eager to fight. For some time they exchange blows which cause their bodies to explode and regenerate. Both continue fighting with Kars utilizing both U-Boat Ultimate and Dune Ultimate in an effort to both destroy and seal Dio away. However, this doesn't work as the two Ultimate Life Forms revel in the best times of their lives. Dio then decides to enact his own planned attack in which he would use Funny Valentine and The Funniest Valentine to teleport Kars. Initially, this fails, but after many tries, it succeeds. However, Kars and Joji Joestar use an alternate version of Yoshikage Kira to spam Bites the Dust and reset the world to one hour before the Valentines would catch Kars in Dio's clap trap. At just the right moment, Joji screams out for Kars to dodge. Though Dio uses a backup plan, and has nine versions of Funny Valentine and nine versions of The Funniest Valentine jump at Kars and teleport him before they all perish as Menger SpongesW. 
 
Dio believes he has won, then he notice's Kars hovering above having perfected Dio's own The World Ultimate and used it to escape a split-second before the Funnies touched him. Joji wonders where Dio's confidence comes from, and for a moment, he catches a glimpse of what appears to be Jesus behind Dio and begins to realize that Dio has a Beyond on his side. Dio forms his own The World Ultimate to battle Kars, but Kars switches to Whitesnake Ultimate and then punches Dio on the side of his head, shattering The World's Stand DISC. He then shatters Dio's body into nine pieces, but not before Dio can stab his C-Moon with the Requiem Arrow. Dio then escapes from the bubble around the United Kingdom and activates Made in Heaven Ultimate Requiem and begins to reset the universe. It is revealed by the Valentine's that Dio must be the Saint's Corpse from the original Steel Ball Run universe and that Dio must be attempting to go there to collect all of his split body parts and recombine them into one to continue the fight. Using Bites the Dust, Kars and Joji travel back in time to the Steel Ball Run Universe where they all converge on Trinity ChurchW where the Saint's Corpse is located. There Dio attempts to remove the head of the Saint's Corpse to reattach his own head to, but he is stopped by Erina and Lisa Lisa who distract Dio while Kars and Joji place Jonathan's head on the Saint's Corpse, reviving Jonathan Joestar and returning him back to Erina. In anger, Dio attaches his head to the decapitated Diego Brando and then disappears into the darkness, declaring that he's done dealing with Joestars. 



Dio's name is derived from the Italian word for "God", befitting his megalomaniac personality and his project to create a new world for him and his subordinates as implied in Stone Ocean. His Heaven-Attained DIO form also fits as well due to warping reality to his liking.
The style of Dio's name in Part 1 is written normally, whereas DIO's name in Part 3 onward is written in English and completely capitalized.
Despite this, Giorno's picture of him has "Dio Brando" imprinted on it, even though his original name would have been long forgotten by then.
The trick DIO used on Hol Horse by instantly going through spider webs without damaging them is likely a reference to Bela Lugosi's first scenes in Dracula (1931).
Out of coincidence, Dio shares two of his Japanese voice actors and his English anime voice actor with the CastlevaniaW version of DraculaW, those being Hikaru MidorikawaW in the OVA and the PS2 game, Norio WakamotoW in the Audio Drama, and Patrick Seitz in the anime. Midorikawa voices Dracula's reincarnation in the series, Soma Cruz, while Wakamoto and Seitz voice Dracula himself.
The bridge Jotaro defeats DIO on is the Qasr al-Nil BridgeW, which connects downtown CairoW to Gezira IslandW and the ZamalekW district. Its coordinates are 30.043747°N 31.229464°E.
In Araki's top Ten Favourite Characters in 2000, DIO ranked as 10th, being the third main villain in the countdown.
Dio and Diego's themes in Eyes Of Heaven are remixes of each other. This is true for both Dio Brando and Scary Monsters Diego, as well as DIO and Alternate Diego. This makes sense as Diego is the reboot of sorts counterpart of Dio.
One reason Jonathan's body would reject Dio's head would be transplant rejection. Transplant rejection occurs when the recipient's immune system attacks the transplanted organ or tissue. The immune response protects the body against potentially harmful substances ("antigens") such as microorganisms, toxins and cancer cells. The immune system distinguishes "proper" from "strange" and reacts against substances it considers "foreign". In other words, that meant Jonathan's body was still fighting Dio's head.
Araki considers Dio to be 'the true protagonist' of Phantom Blood. Araki developed Dio's character design before Jonathan. Dio also makes his debut first before Jonathan. Araki pondered in deciding what would be the scariest factor, and decided that "evil from the past" coming to get the present descendant would be the most frightening thing. Dio was developed with this in mind. After him, Jonathan Joestar of 'light' was designed to counter Dio's 'darkness'.
In a spring 2018 interview with Shueisha's Kotoba magazine, Araki describes how Blade RunnerW had influenced his work back when it premiered. He mentions Dio's blond hair and muscular build in particular as being influenced by the Blade Runner character, Roy Batty.
Dio is stated to be BisexualW by Araki in a 2007 interview.

Zephyr, one of the bosses in the video game Castlevania: Dawn of Sorrow as well as Portrait of Ruin, pays homage to Dio Brando. Besides a habit of bending over backwards, he has the ability to throw knives, as well as freeze time with a shout of Toki yo Tomare!!! ("Stop, O time!", translated to "Time, be still!" in the English dub of Portrait of Ruin, where Zephyr appears as a bonus boss.). He also faces the protagonist in a clock tower, a reference to Dio Brando's fight with Joseph Joestar and Kakyoin in the first half of the Dio's World story arc.
Sakuya Izayoi from the Touhou Project series is likely an homage to Dio. She is not a vampire, but the servant of Remilia Scarlet, who is a vampire. Her main power is manipulation of time - usually demonstrated by stopping it completely. She attacks by throwing knives as well. Some of her spell cards involve stopping time and making many knives appear around the player, and one of these cards is even named Illusion World "The World". In the fighting game spin-offs, she has many time-stopping special moves, one of which is called "Sakuya's World", which acts in the same way as Dio's time stop move in the JoJo fighting game.
Ironically, Miyuki Sawashiro, who voiced Sakuya in the Koumajou Densetsu II fangame, voices Jolyne Cujoh along with seiyuu Ryou Hirohashi as Reimi Sugimoto and Eri Kitamura as Yasuho Hirose (who voiced in the same fangame Touhou characters Youmu Konpaku and Remilia Scarlet respectively) all in All Star Battle, with Youmu herself being a possible reference to Jean Pierre Polnareff. Meanwhile, in the anime of Part 4, Reimu Hakurei's voice actress in the same fangame, Rina Satou, also voices Hayato Kawajiri.
The characters Robo-Ky and Justice from the 2D fighter series Guilty Gear both make references to Dio's 'The World'- Robo-Ky in the form of the "Muda" battlecry with a barrage of punches in one of his Overdrive attacks (though he says "Dame"; lit. "No Good" instead), and Justice in the form of a "WRYYYYYYYYY"-like battlecry and pose in both her victory poses and her most powerful Overdrive attack, Gamma Ray.
Furthermore, Dio's current seiyuu, Takehito Koyasu, also voices Zato-1/Eddie in this game, a necessary change after the death of Eddie/Zato-1's original voice actor, Kaneto Shiozawa.
In the online game, Erepublik, Dio Brando (in the form of DIO) is featured as a God Emperor of his own religion in Pakistan, referred to as "Dioism", as well as the President of a political party named the "Stardust Crusaders". Among other things within the game, Dio is also a Nobel Peace Prize recipient.
In the NBC drama, Heroes, a fictional Japanese salaryman named Hiro NakamuraW is a fan of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure. As well as the references detailed in Jotaro's page, a scene in Volume 2 has Hiro freeze time to steal the swords of a group of samurai. Although subtitled along the lines of "That was a bad idea", Hiro taunts the samurai by saying "Muda, muda, muda!!", DIO's battlecry from Stardust Crusaders.
In the popular pixal avatar site Gaia online, there are obtainable item series known as the "RIO Star" series. These items show resemblances to Dio's outfit in Stardust Crusaders. There are also "Back/Tails" accessories that are called "K.O. Star (Za Warudo)" and "K.O. Star (Time Stop)" which is obviously a reference to Dio's stand, The World (Za Warudo).
Cheria Barnes from Tales of Graces has a fighting style based on Part 3 DIO's abilities. She attacks using throwing knives as well as stopping Time. However her main focus is to heal the rest of the party, in the story this is done by touching the effected area, much like how Dio healed Pucci's disfigured foot.
Peacock, a playable character from SkullgirlsW, is able to make a steamroller fall on her opponents like Dio in fighting games. If the hit connects, the little fellow Avery has the same behavior and pummels the steamroller until it explodes as seen in this video. Valentine, another playable character, throws scalpels like Dio throws knifes. By setting up Valentine's scalpel throw as an assist move, and with good timing and luck getting the steam roller, it's possible to recreate the Road-roller combo from HftF since time freezes during the roller drop. The character Big Band can also turn his special move Super-Sonic Jazz into a flurry of punches similar to a Stand rush while crying "TUBATUBATUBATUBA!", a reference to Dio's own warcry.
In League of Legends, the champion Sett has an, as of writing, unreleased emote referencing the "Kono Dio Da!" meme.
Additionally, during Sett's gameplay spotlight video, the narrator yells Dio's famous "MUDA MUDA MUDA" cry when discussing one of Sett's abilities, & ends the video with a reference to the "Oh, you're approaching me?" meme. All this is topped off with the fact that Dio's japanese voice actor, Takehito Koyasu, also plays Sett in the Japanese dub of the game.



↑ 1.0 1.1 JoJonium
↑ Phantom Blood PS2 (10/2006)
↑ The Mist of Emptiness, Vanilla Ice - Vol.9 "Shueisha Jump Remix Stardust Crusaders Edition" P170 The Secret of JOJO Characters
↑ JoJo 6251, p.103
↑ JJBA Artbook: JoJo 6251, page 151
↑ SO Chapter 152: "Made in Heaven, Part 4" (Note: Originally 1988; Changed in later chapters)
↑ 7.0 7.1 JoJo 6251, page 148
↑ Chapter 440: "Gold Experience, Part 1", p.11
↑ Chapter 6: "A Letter from the Past, Part 1", p.8
↑ Chapter 1: "Prologue", p.9
↑ Chapter 7, A Letter from the Past 2
↑ Chapter 2, Dio Brando the Invader Part 1
quote "I like being number one. You hear that? I won't let anyone swagger over me!"
quote: "I hate dogs! They're filthy vermin who don't know their place!"
↑ Chapter 4, Dio Brando the Invader Part 3quote: "Alright! I'm burning with power, I love this feeling!"
↑ Volume 1, Chapter 1: Dio the Invader
↑ Chapter 117: "The Man with the Star Birthmark"
↑ Chapter 116: "Jotaro Kujo, Part 3"
↑ Chapter 593: "Sleeping Slaves, Part 4"
↑ SO Chapter 119: "Under World, Part 1"
↑ SO Chapter 127: "Heavy Weather, Part 3"
↑ SO Chapter 110: "Bohemian Rhapsody, Part 7"
↑ SO Chapter 115: "Sky High, Part 4"
↑ SO Chapter 128: "Heavy Weather, Part 4"
↑ SO Chapter 129: "Heavy Weather, Part 5"
↑ SO Chapter 48: "Flash Flood Warning, Part 1"
↑ SO Chapter 94: "Time for Heaven"
↑ SO Chapter 61: "The Secret of Guard Westwood, Part 2"
↑ JoJo 6251 Stand Encyclopedia, P.124
↑ JORGE JOESTAR Chapter 16: Beyond II
↑ JORGE JOESTAR Chapter 5: The Box
↑ JORGE JOESTAR Chapter 16: Beyond II
↑ Chapter 39-41: Blood Battle! JoJo vs. Dio
↑ V JumpW Games Series - All of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure: Vento Aureo Interview
↑ Gorgeous Irene Ch 1
↑ JOJOmenon
↑ Hirohiko Araki Reveals Which Blade Runner Character Inspired DIO